[contributing] I18n onboarding doc (#18424)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/contributing/gatsby-docs-translation-guide.md

If you're a native speaker of a language other than English and you're interested in helping translate gatsbyjs.org, here is some information for you to know:

## The general process

Each translation has its own repository in the [gatsbyjs](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/) organization on GitHub, with two or three designated codeowners to review and approve changes. This doc will outline how to request a new language repository with its own team, what decisions each team can make, and suggestions for how you can work together.

The Gatsby learning team is in charge of determining priorities for which docs should be translated. Refer to the [i18n page spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1u2amGnqFLKxJuL5h9UrDblUueFgg0EBt7xbau4n8iTM/edit) to get the most up-to-date priority list.

> > ⚠️ Note: All contributors are expected to follow the [Gatsby Code of Conduct](/contributing/code-of-conduct/) and work professionally with fellow contributors. For issues with conduct, if you are unable to work things out amicably amongst yourselves (perhaps after filing a public issue), you can contact the Gatsby team at [conduct@gatsbyjs.com](mailto:conduct@gatsbyjs.com) with details about the situation.

Author: Great idea! I added it to the top of the priorities spreadsheet.

> > ⚠️ Note: All contributors are expected to follow the [Gatsby Code of Conduct](/contributing/code-of-conduct/) and work professionally with fellow contributors. For issues with conduct, if you are unable to work things out amicably amongst yourselves (perhaps after filing a public issue), you can contact the Gatsby team at [conduct@gatsbyjs.com](mailto:conduct@gatsbyjs.com) with details about the situation.

Reviewer: The email `conduct@gatsbyjs.com` doesn’t actually work, I tried to write to this address, but received an error about sending. I also wrote in DM on Twitter, but they also did not reply.

It’s unfortunate that the Gatsby team doesn’t care what kind of problems are happening to their community!

> > ⚠️ Note: All contributors are expected to follow the [Gatsby Code of Conduct](/contributing/code-of-conduct/) and work professionally with fellow contributors. For issues with conduct, if you are unable to work things out amicably amongst yourselves (perhaps after filing a public issue), you can contact the Gatsby team at [conduct@gatsbyjs.com](mailto:conduct@gatsbyjs.com) with details about the situation.

Author: Hi @lex111, the conduct alias does work, and we do care -- our sincere apologies for taking a while to get back to you. Our request has been that situations be attempted to remedy amongst yourselves in the open through GitHub issues first, and that is what you were asked to do originally by Nat. However, we recognize that you were missing write access and that likely contributed to the feeling of being ignored. As early pioneers of the Gatsby translation project, you've helped us iron out some of the issues with repos, process, and governance around translations of which we'll do our best to represent and maintain in this doc. It looks like you've since [opened an issue](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-ru/issues/19) in the Gatsby-ru project that seemed to have a productive outcome, so thanks for doing that (and keep opening issues as needed)!

## Use English as the source

The [gatsbyjs.org](https://gatsbyjs.org) website is written in English and should be considered the source material for all translations (as opposed to translating from another translation). When a repository is created, it will provide the space to copy over prioritized docs and [make pull requests](/contributing/how-to-open-a-pull-request/) against them in the relevant language.

## Process for starting a new translation

The first step for starting a new translation is to check what exists. So far, there are repositories for the following languages:

- [Spanish](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-es)
- [Russian](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-ru)

> Note: Once a new translation repository is created, feel free to add it here in a PR!

### Finding 2-3 codeowners

> For a new translation, open an issue with information about your intended language. If you already have co-contributors to act as fellow [code owners](https://help.github.com/en/articles/about-code-owners) and provide checks and balances for PR reviews and quality assurance, that would be very helpful! Otherwise, you can check out the [RFC](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/rfcs/pull/42) for interested participants or [get in touch with us](/contributing/how-to-contribute/#not-sure-how-to-start-contributing) at Gatsby for help in building your translation team.

Author: I added the start to that section, it could probably use some more specific details.

If disputes arise, having a conversation on Discord or over a GitHub issue should be the start. If all attempts have been made and something can not be resolved on your own, you can contact the Gatsby team at [conduct@gatsbyjs.com](mailto:conduct@gatsbyjs.com) with details about the situation.

### Code review process

    - Invite comments for a code review process (Google Translate, etc.)

### Templates for responses on PRs

    - PR templates for responses (e.g. non-meaningful changes, etc.)

## Which decisions are flexible? Which are firm guidelines?

## Language-specific maintainer channels

Each translation group may want to have your own communication channels for maintainers and community members to ask questions and coordinate the project. Discord is the most recommended option but there are alternatives, and maintainers can ultimately choose their own communication channel(s). Here are some recommendations:

- [Discord](https://gatsby.dev/discord)
- Wechat
- Whatsapp

> - GitHub groups

Reviewer: @tesseralis @marcysutton this is not a good idea actually. GitHub teams/groups are very convenient to automatically request a review, and to inform all teams that are engaged only in translations, something important.

I also remind you that you can control notifications from groups as you wish.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4408379/66724015-331b2e80-ee29-11e9-80fa-2120a4926b3e.png)

* * *

I beg you to reconsider this decision, or to conduct a survey to make the determination, because you come from your experience as the translations curator, and therefore you can’t know how GH groups are helped to maintainers.

> - GitHub groups

Reviewer: :warning: Very urgent!

Explain to me how a completely stranger could make changes directly to the `master` branch without merge pull request?!

Please take a look here: https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-ru/commit/b6301dce6f229a9e71a8000b8eaa177d37a0c81c#commitcomment-35474697

I'm as a code owner for some reason can’t do this, but some person who has nothing to do with Russian translation could do it! This is a machine translation, if that!

Please stop ignoring me, I am writing about important things that help the our community!

> - GitHub groups

Reviewer 2: @lex111 The notification feature is available with codeowners. Codeowners are automatically requested for review in a PR. The reason you weren't for the Russian translation was because you weren't already a member of the Gatsby organization. You should be one now, and should have the proper permissions to review and make changes.

The issue with the spam contributor has also been resolved. Thank you for bringing this up.

> - GitHub groups

Reviewer: @tesseralis yes, I did not know this, and wrote about it many times, but no one answered, but it was good that it was decided :+1:

---
title: Gatsby Docs Translation Guide
---

> Since the [RFC on localization](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/rfcs/pull/42) for Gatsby, there is now an ongoing effort to translate the content on Gatsbyjs.org into multiple languages. For members of the community around the world building Gatsby sites and learning about web development, having docs and learning materials in your own language provides a lot of value. There's also a great opportunity for folks like you to contribute to the translations of the Gatsby docs.

Reviewer 2: The RFC got merged so I think you can just link to the file: https://github.com/gatsbyjs/rfcs/blob/master/text/0010-gatsby-docs-localization.md

Reviewer 2: Also, maybe we don't need to mention it? It seems like unnecessary context that could be confusing to people (eg 'what's an RFC?')

Author: Good idea! updated.

> If you're a native speaker of a language other than English and you're interested in helping translate gatsbyjs.org, here is some information for you to know:

Reviewer 2: do we only want to restrict to native speakers? Wouldn't fluency be enough?

Author: Ooh, good call. "Fluent speakers" is an easy change.

## The general process

Each translation has its own repository in the [gatsbyjs](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/) organization on GitHub, with designated codeowners to review and approve changes. This doc will outline how to request a new language repository with its own team, what decisions each team can make, and suggestions for how you can work together.

The Gatsby learning team is in charge of determining priorities for which docs should be translated. Refer to the [i18n page spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1u2amGnqFLKxJuL5h9UrDblUueFgg0EBt7xbau4n8iTM/edit) to get the most up-to-date priority list.

## Use English as the source

> The [gatsbyjs.org](https://gatsbyjs.org) website is written in English and should be considered the source material for all translations (as opposed to translating from another translation). When a repository is created, it will provide the space to copy over prioritized docs and [make pull requests](/contributing/how-to-open-a-pull-request/) against them in the relevant language.

Author: ```suggestion
The [gatsbyjs.org](https://gatsbyjs.org) website is written in English and should be considered the source material for all translations (as opposed to translating from another translation). When a repository is created, it will provide a copy of the docs to be translated which you can then update through [pull requests](/contributing/how-to-open-a-pull-request/) against them in the relevant language.

Changes to the meaning of a text or code example should be done in the main English repo.
```

## Process for starting a new translation

The first step for starting a new translation is to check what exists. So far, there are repositories for the following languages:

- [Spanish](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-es)
- [Russian](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-ru)

You can find the list of all translation requests here: https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue+%22New+Translation+Request%22+

> > Note: Once a new translation repository is created, feel free to add it here in a PR!

Reviewer 2: This should be replaced with the /languages page on the website once that's actually created.

Author: Linking to the repos might be nice for contributing purposes, but it would definitely be harder to maintain...that would be easier.

### Finding codeowners

For a new translation, open an issue with information about your intended language. If you already have co-contributors to act as fellow [code owners](https://help.github.com/en/articles/about-code-owners) and provide checks and balances for PR reviews and quality assurance, that would be very helpful! Otherwise, you can check out other [translation request issues](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+%22New+Translation+Request%22) people have made and offer to join, or [get in touch with us](/contributing/how-to-contribute/#not-sure-how-to-start-contributing) at Gatsby for help in building your translation team.

> ## Contributing to a translation

Reviewer 3: We create a how-to contribute document to start with the translations here: https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-es/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.MD.

The idea is that this document exposes how to start, create the fork, create a branch, open a PR, add labels and request for review, as well as the process to ask for the page they want to translate in the progress issue, but the point is that a document in the original language on `How to contribute` should be added because we consider that not only people that know English should contribute, we ask for people with really good Spanish, for example, to help curate content, like grammar or accents :muscle:

Author: Thanks @Darking360, I'm adding a link to it as an example!

Maintainers of a translation are expected to review translations for quality, friendly and encouraging tone of voice, and technical accuracy. These qualities should be considered in every pull request regardless of who it comes from; contributions should be encouraged from anyone in the community, not just maintainers.

> ⚠️ Note: All contributors are expected to follow the [Gatsby Code of Conduct](/contributing/code-of-conduct/) and work professionally with fellow contributors. For issues with conduct, if you are unable to work things out amicably amongst yourselves (perhaps after filing a public issue or having a discussion on Discord), you can contact the Gatsby team at [conduct@gatsbyjs.com](mailto:conduct@gatsbyjs.com) with details about the situation.

### Code review process

Translation contributions must be opened as pull requests to provide time for review and comments. If actionable feedback is given on a PR review, the author must acknowledge the review and make changes with their discretion. Ignoring review feedback completely is not allowed (see response templates below for help with this).

> ### Maintainer responsibilities

Reviewer 3: We created a separate page for this in the Spanish repository, you can find it here: https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-es/blob/master/MAINTAINERS.MD

The responsibilities are almost the same, but we added some more like:

-  Have a certain amount of time weekly to dedicate to the project, around 4 to 8 hours, always remembering that we all have work and life outside the project.
- Have a good grammatic and orthography for the project. (For example in Spanish we miss a lot of accents in the words sometimes).
- Ideally, they've contributed before with the Gatsby translations. (This intended to be checked before including them as maintainers).
- A great desire to contribute to Open Source a help to grow the Gatsby community.

You can find it all in the Spanish document (probably pass Google translate on it), but the point is that I think that a `How to be a maintainer` should be included in the docs to call for new contributors, also we think that a number of maintainers between 3 and 5 are ok :thinking:

Author: I think having the information centrally is important so contributors don't have to go find it in a translation repo in a different language, but having it in your translation repo is helpful too. So it could live in both places 😃

Reviewer 2: I like the responsibilities listed here. @Darking360 the point about having 4-8 hours per week I think is dependent on each language. Even with React, some languages had more work, and thus needed more time from the maintainers.

As repo maintainers and members of the Gatsby community, your responsibilities are as follows:

- Keep issues up to date as people volunteer to translate pages.
- Review pull requests made by contributors promptly.
- Review pull requests generated by gatsbybot in order to make sure translations remain up to date with the source repo.
- Act as point of contact for your language and answer questions from both contributors to your language and the core Gatsby team.
- Set up a process in order to get your translation published. (details to come)

Additional tips:

- Make a glossary and translation style guide. Here are some [examples from the React translation project](https://github.com/reactjs/reactjs.org-translation/blob/master/maintainer-guide.md#make-a-glossary-and-style-guide).
- Collaborate on large or challenging pages. More than one person can contribute to a long tutorial or reference guide!
- Set up a review process
- Ask for help

> ### Templates for responses on PRs

Reviewer 2: what is this section supposed to be about?

Author: Does the intro paragraph on line 79 not explain it well enough?

Reviewer 2: all cleared up on slack :)

Author: I'm updating it to "Template responses for closing PRs"
